>> Evgenii Ray: Okay, so now we have
the browser positioning system.
So in the web,
we have a term normal flow, so
it's basically when the elements
are rendered in a natural order.
So for instance, in the Altair languages,
they ran their enemies from top to bottom,
from left to right, from RTL languages
are rendered from right to left.
And if we have a term normal flow,
does it mean that we can't remove
elements from the normal flow?
And apparently, we can.
So there is a special property
called position that allows
us to override how the browser
positions the element.
And the most useful one is
the static relative of absolute, so
we'll start with the static.
So the static is basically
applied by default.
When you build your layout,
the browser applies the static
position to every element.
And as you can see,
if we render this HTML,
we'll see that everything is rendered
from top to bottom, from left to right,
the position relative has a few
interesting characteristics.
So, the element in the center
is positioned relatively.
So the key differences or
the browser renders the element that is
positioned relative,
the same as the normal flow.
But the final position is
determined by the top, right,
bottom, and left properties in CSS.
So we can move our element, and
you can see when we move that,
the change to the position
doesn't impact other elements.
So somehow,
we can adjust the position of the element
without impacting other elements.
And this is because the element
is removed from normal flow.
And when the element is
removed from normal flow,
it doesn't impact any other elements.
And there is also one important
term that we're going to look
after a few slides as a Stacking Context.
So when we apply position relative,
we create a new stacking context,
some kind of new realm,
where we put over all our elements.
And these elements now are completely
isolated from everything that was
within the normal flow.
So before we discuss
the position absolute,
I think it's important to understand
what is the containing block.
So the containing block is
kind of a reference point for
the element, how it calculates
its position on the screen.
So for instance, for HTML, the containing
block will be the browser viewport.
When you open the page,
you browse a window,
so this is the default viewport for HTML.
But there are rules when we can
create the containing blocks.
So for instance, if you apply the relative
position to the div tag, you will see
that because the relative position is
applied, it becomes the continuing block.
So now the div is the continuing
block of the paragraph.
So the same there is one
more rule which is for
if we set the position relative
to the to the element,
the closest containing block of this
element will be the closest ancestor.
So this means the body as
a closest ancestor becomes
the containing block of the div tag.
>> Evgenii Ray: And
let's discuss the position absolute now.
So the position absolute behaves
completely different from relative
positioning.
So the element is removed
from the normal thought.
So if we apply the position
absolute to the paragraph, so
now we create a new Stacking Context.
So as you can see, every modification
that we potentially could do to this
element will be isolated from
the default Stacking Context.
And also, the final position is always
determined by the top, right, bottom, and
the left properties.
And absolute position item use
its containing block to calculate
its position.
So by default,
the settlement will be rendered at
the left topmost corner of the element.
And then we can adjust this
position using the properties here.
Let's try to render a few absolute items.
So for instance,
we have the following HTML, and
right now we render it
the body section and a div.
Now we have two absolute position boxes,
so let's render it one by one.
So when we render the Box 1, so
we created a new Stacking Context
because position absolute is a sign.
So when we render the second box,
then we created a new Stacking Context,
so now the Box 1 and
Box 2 are rendered in the separate realms.
And also, you can see that
because it's a Stacking Context,
the Box 2 is rendered on the top
of the Box 1, because the layering
works as a stack by default,
unless you apply the Z-index property.
So what is the key summary?
Why it's important to understand
the relative and absolute positioning?
The benefit of the relative and
absolute positioning lies in their ability
to remove items from the normal flow.
So if we use this position in y's,
we can achieve the isolation.
So every modification to the element
will be completely isolated, so
it means that we can optimize
the dome performance.
And it's also,
we can minimize potential reflow.
And we're gonna discuss
reflow just in a few slides.
And to prove the point that there
is a kind of z-axis when we
render the elements.
So, when we just built
a template with HTML,
we usually utilize x and y-axis.
But there is a another axis,
which is z-axis,
which is used when we apply some 3D
transformation, absolute position.
So basically when we work
with this Stacking Context.
And we will see later in a few slides how
Stacking Context is connected to GPU and
how the browser utilizes the layers.
So right now, all we need to
know is that Stacking Context
provides us with a layering system and
isolated realms of the elements.
Okay, so to prove the point,
we can render three boxes and
change the perspective how
we view at the viewpoint and
then apply the translate z, and move
the elements kind of on top of each other.
So you see that they kinda
stack on each other.